Montenegro has been a political entity since at least the 11th century. For most of the 20th century, Montenegro was part of Yugoslavia, which started to break apart in the Yugoslav Wars in the 1990s. Montenegro remained united with Serbia until it became independent in 2006. It is one of Europe's youngest states. Infrastructure greatly improved since independence as Montenegro became home to numerous five-star hotels, glamorous new settlements and investments in roads, energy, water and sanitary pipelines.
Montenegro was founded as a state under its present name in 15th century, continuing the tradition of the Slavic state of Duklja. It was able to maintain its independence during the reign of the Ottoman Empire in the Balkans, as its independence was recognized at the Congress of Berlin in 1878. In World War I, it fought on the side of the Allied powers. It was absorbed into the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, which became the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1929. Montenegro was part of various incarnations of Yugoslavia, until it regained its independence from the federation of Serbia-Montenegro after the May 2006 referendum. Montenegro was the only republic of the former Yugoslavia that supported Serbia during the wars of the 1990s.
Montenegro's lower areas along the coast enjoy a Mediterranean climate, having dry summers and mild, rainy winters. Central and northern regions have Continental climate, where temperature varies greatly with elevation. Podgorica, lying near sea level in the valley of the central region, is noted for having the warmest July temperatures in Montenegro, averaging 35-40°C (95-104°F).
Cetinje, in the Karst at an elevation of 670m (2,200 ft), has a temperature 5°C (10°F) lower. January temperatures range from 8°C (46°F) from Bar on the southern coast to -3°C (27°F) in the northern region.
Montenegro's mountainous regions receive some of the highest amounts of rainfall in Europe. In the northern mountains, snow is present throughout the spring.
The country's name in most Western European languages reflects an adaptation of the Venetian Montenegro 'black mountain'. In older English literature, the variant Montenegria was also used.[13] Many other languages, particularly nearby ones, use their own direct translation of the term "black mountain". Examples include Albanian Mali i Zi, Greek Μαυροβούνιο Mavrovoúnio, Turkish Karadağ (which is similar in other Turkic languages), Arabic الجبل الاسود al-Jabal al-Aswad and even Chinese 黑山 Hēishān, all of which mean 'black mountain'. Slavic languages use slight variations on the Montenegrin name Crna Gora. Examples include Czech Černá Hora, Russian Черного́рия Černogórija, Bulgarian Черна гора Černa gora, and Polish Czarnogóra. Other languages include Chechen and Ingush Ӏаьржаламанчоь Järƶalamançö, Karbadian БгыфӀыцӀей Bgyf’yc’ej, Meadow Mari Шемкурык Эл Šemkuryk El, Latvian Melnkalne, and Lithuanian Juodkalnija. Mongolian calls the country either Черногори Chernogori (a loanword from Russian) or Монтенегро Montenegro.
The name Crna Gora came to denote the majority of contemporary Montenegro only in the 15th century.[14] Originally, it had referred to only a small strip of land under the rule of the Paštrovići, but the name eventually came to be used for the wider mountainous region after the Crnojević noble family took power in Upper Zeta.[14] The aforementioned region became known as Stara Crna Gora 'Old Montenegro' by the 19th century to distinguish the independent region from the neighbouring Ottoman-occupied Montenegrin territory of Brda '(The) Highlands'. Montenegro further increased its size several times by the 20th century, as the result of wars against the Ottoman Empire, which saw the annexation of Old Herzegovina and parts of Metohija and southern Raška. Its borders have changed little since then, losing Metohija and gaining the Bay of Kotor.
After the second session of the AVNOJ during World War II in Yugoslavia, the modern state of Montenegro was founded as the Federal State of Montenegro (Montenegrin: Савезна држава Црне Горе Savezna država Crne Gore) on 15 November 1943 within the Democratic Federal Yugoslavia by the ZAVNOCGB. After DF Yugoslavia became the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia, the Federal State of Montenegro was renamed to the People's Republic of Montenegro (Montenegrin: Народна Република Црна Гора Narodna Republika Crna Gora) on 29 November 1945. In 1963, the FPRY was renamed to the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and coincidentally, the People's Republic of Montenegro was renamed to the Socialist Republic of Montenegro (Montenegrin: Социјалистичка Република Црна Гора Socijalistička Republika Crna Gora). As the breakup of Yugoslavia occurred, the SRCG was renamed to the Republic of Montenegro (Montenegrin: Република Црна Гора Republika Crna Gora) on 27 April 1992 within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia by removing the adjective "socialist" from the republic's title. Since 22 October 2007, a year after its independence, the name of the country became simply known as Montenegro.
The ISO Alpha-2 code for Montenegro is ME and the Alpha-3 Code is MNE.